README.md, before:


# WAPIml

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/opendata-for-all/wapiml.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/opendata-for-all/wapiml)
[![Version 1.1.0 Badge][version-badge]][changelog]
[![License Badge](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-EPL%202.0-brightgreen.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/EPL-2.0)

WAPIml is an OpenAPI round-trip tool that leverages model-driven techniques to create, visualize, manage, and generate OpenAPI
definitions. WAPIml embeds an OpenAPI metamodel but also a UML profile to enable working with OpenAPI in any Eclipse UML-compatible modeling tool.

N.B. The legacy tool **OpenAPItoUML**, which generates UML models from OpenAPI definitions, can be found under the branch [*openapi-to-uml*](https://github.com/opendata-for-all/wapiml/tree/openapi-to-uml).

## Requirements

- Eclipse Modeling tools (it can be found [here](https://www.eclipse.org/downloads/packages/release/2019-06/r/eclipse-modeling-tools)).
- [Papyrus](https://www.eclipse.org/papyrus/) to visualize the UML model and manage the profile.

## Installation

1. Open Eclipse IDE
2. Click on *Help / Install New Software...*
3. Click on *Add...* and fill in the form as indicated (the update site is https://opendata-for-all.github.io/wapiml/update/wapiml) then click on *OK*.

![Add repository](https://opendata-for-all.github.io/wapiml/images/wapiml/capture1.PNG)

4. Select *WAPIlml* then click on *Next*.

![Install](https://opendata-for-all.github.io/wapiml/images/wapiml/capture2.PNG)

5. Follow the the rest of the steps (license, etc...) and reboot Eclipse.

## Using the plugin

###### Generating UML models 
1. Create a Project or use an existing project in your workspace.
2. Import your OpenAPI 2 definition into the project (**we support both JSON and YAML**). 
3. Right-click on the definition file and select *WAPIml/Generate a class diagram* to start. This will initiate a wizard to guide the generation process. The first page of the wizard is shown below.
	
![page1](https://opendata-for-all.github.io/wapiml/images/wapiml/page1.PNG)

4. Check *Apply the OpenAPI profile* if you want to enrich your UML model with OpenAPI stereotypes (this mandatory if you want to generate an OpenAPI definition later) and check *Discover associations* if you want the process to discover implicit associations by analyzing schema properties (note: this only concerns the association that are not explicitly defined. Explicit associations will be included in the model either way).
5. Click on *Next*. This will display the second page of the wizard.

![page1](https://opendata-for-all.github.io/wapiml/images/wapiml/page2.PNG)

- The first table includes the explicit associations defined using JSON Schema (properties of type object or array of objects). You could change the aggregation kind of an association by clicking on its row (the default one is composite).
- The second table shows the discovered associations which are not explicity defined in the definition. You could change the aggregation kind and the target property. You could also delete the association using a right-click on the row of the association and selecting *Delete Selection*.

7. Click on *Finish*. The generated model are located under the folder *src-gen*


###### Modeling OpenAPI definitions using Papyrus

From a generated model:

1. Open the perspective *Papyrus*.
2. Right-click on the generated UML model and select *New -> Papyrus Model*.
4. Follow the steps in the wizard to initialize a Class diagram (keep everything as predefined except in the *Initialization information* step where you should check *Class Diagram* as the Respresentation kind).
5. Drag-and-drop the UML elements from the *Model Explorer* into the editor.
6. Align and arrange the layout as you prefer.
7. Save.

![Petstore](https://opendata-for-all.github.io/wapiml/images/wapiml/petstore.png)

From scratch:

1. Open the perspective *Papyrus*.
2. Click on *File* then select *New -> Papyrus Model*.
3. Follow the steps in the wizard to initialize a Class diagram (keep everything as predefined except in the *Initialization information* step where you should check *Class Diagram* as the Representation kind and click on *Browse Registered Profiles* and select *OpenAPI* as shown below).

![profile](https://opendata-for-all.github.io/wapiml/images/wapiml/capture3.PNG)

4. Add UML elements to the canvas.
5. Use the the *Properties* view to apply the stereotypes and set the tag values (see an example below).

![Properties views](https://opendata-for-all.github.io/wapiml/images/wapiml/capture4.PNG)

###### Generate an OpenAPI definition from an annotated UML model

1. Switch to the perspective *Java*.
2. Right-click on the annotated UML model and select *WAPIml -> Generate an OpenAPI definition in JSON format* to generate the definition in JSON or *WAPIml -> Generate an OpenAPI definition in YAML format* to generate the definition in YAML.

The generated OpenAPI definition will be located under the folder *src-gen*.

## Notes
- Each schema definition  (#/definitions) of type `object` is represented as a class.
- The location of an operation (i.e., in which class it should be) is decided based on the schema this operation produces (response 2xx schema), the schema it consumes (parameter of type body), or the tags properties of the operation. When no class is a good fit for the operation, an artificial class is created to host the operation. The name of such class is inferred from the path of the operation.
- The name of an operation is taken from `operationId` of the operation definition. If such information is not provided the name is created by concatenating the method of the operation (e.g., get, post) plus the name of its class.
- The cardinalities of attributes and parameters are inferred from:
	- the `type` field (`array` for multivalued)
	- the `required` field in the OpenAPI definition (note that a required parameter or property of type `array` doesn't not mean that the lower bound should be 1. Empty arrays are still valid).
	- `minItems` and `maxItems` for `array` types.

N.B. This tool relies on [the OpenAPI metamodel](https://github.com/opendata-for-all/openapi-metamodel) and [the OpenAPI UML profile](https://github.com/opendata-for-all/openapi-profile).


[changelog]: ./CHANGELOG.md
[version-badge]: https://img.shields.io/badge/version-1.1.0-blue.svg

Commit message:

Add a note about the update site

README.md, after:


# WAPIml

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/opendata-for-all/wapiml.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/opendata-for-all/wapiml)
[![Version 1.1.0 Badge][version-badge]][changelog]
[![License Badge](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-EPL%202.0-brightgreen.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/EPL-2.0)

WAPIml is an OpenAPI round-trip tool that leverages model-driven techniques to create, visualize, manage, and generate OpenAPI
definitions. WAPIml embeds an OpenAPI metamodel but also a UML profile to enable working with OpenAPI in any Eclipse UML-compatible modeling tool.

N.B. The legacy tool **OpenAPItoUML**, which generates UML models from OpenAPI definitions, can be found under the branch [*openapi-to-uml*](https://github.com/opendata-for-all/wapiml/tree/openapi-to-uml).

## Requirements

- Eclipse Modeling tools (it can be found [here](https://www.eclipse.org/downloads/packages/release/2019-06/r/eclipse-modeling-tools)).
- [Papyrus](https://www.eclipse.org/papyrus/) to visualize the UML model and manage the profile.

## Installation

1. Open Eclipse IDE
2. Click on *Help / Install New Software...*
3. Click on *Add...* and fill in the form as indicated (the update site is https://opendata-for-all.github.io/wapiml/update/wapiml/) then click on *OK*.

Note: It's normal to get a 404 page if you open the link in the browser (there is no index.html page in the update site directory).

![Add repository](https://opendata-for-all.github.io/wapiml/images/wapiml/capture1.PNG)

4. Select *WAPIlml* then click on *Next*.

![Install](https://opendata-for-all.github.io/wapiml/images/wapiml/capture2.PNG)

5. Follow the the rest of the steps (license, etc...) and reboot Eclipse.

## Using the plugin

###### Generating UML models 
1. Create a Project or use an existing project in your workspace.
2. Import your OpenAPI 2 definition into the project (**we support both JSON and YAML**). 
3. Right-click on the definition file and select *WAPIml/Generate a class diagram* to start. This will initiate a wizard to guide the generation process. The first page of the wizard is shown below.
	
![page1](https://opendata-for-all.github.io/wapiml/images/wapiml/page1.PNG)

4. Check *Apply the OpenAPI profile* if you want to enrich your UML model with OpenAPI stereotypes (this mandatory if you want to generate an OpenAPI definition later) and check *Discover associations* if you want the process to discover implicit associations by analyzing schema properties (note: this only concerns the association that are not explicitly defined. Explicit associations will be included in the model either way).
5. Click on *Next*. This will display the second page of the wizard.

![page1](https://opendata-for-all.github.io/wapiml/images/wapiml/page2.PNG)

- The first table includes the explicit associations defined using JSON Schema (properties of type object or array of objects). You could change the aggregation kind of an association by clicking on its row (the default one is composite).
- The second table shows the discovered associations which are not explicity defined in the definition. You could change the aggregation kind and the target property. You could also delete the association using a right-click on the row of the association and selecting *Delete Selection*.

7. Click on *Finish*. The generated model are located under the folder *src-gen*


###### Modeling OpenAPI definitions using Papyrus

From a generated model:

1. Open the perspective *Papyrus*.
2. Right-click on the generated UML model and select *New -> Papyrus Model*.
4. Follow the steps in the wizard to initialize a Class diagram (keep everything as predefined except in the *Initialization information* step where you should check *Class Diagram* as the Respresentation kind).
5. Drag-and-drop the UML elements from the *Model Explorer* into the editor.
6. Align and arrange the layout as you prefer.
7. Save.

![Petstore](https://opendata-for-all.github.io/wapiml/images/wapiml/petstore.png)

From scratch:

1. Open the perspective *Papyrus*.
2. Click on *File* then select *New -> Papyrus Model*.
3. Follow the steps in the wizard to initialize a Class diagram (keep everything as predefined except in the *Initialization information* step where you should check *Class Diagram* as the Representation kind and click on *Browse Registered Profiles* and select *OpenAPI* as shown below).

![profile](https://opendata-for-all.github.io/wapiml/images/wapiml/capture3.PNG)

4. Add UML elements to the canvas.
5. Use the the *Properties* view to apply the stereotypes and set the tag values (see an example below).

![Properties views](https://opendata-for-all.github.io/wapiml/images/wapiml/capture4.PNG)

###### Generate an OpenAPI definition from an annotated UML model

1. Switch to the perspective *Java*.
2. Right-click on the annotated UML model and select *WAPIml -> Generate an OpenAPI definition in JSON format* to generate the definition in JSON or *WAPIml -> Generate an OpenAPI definition in YAML format* to generate the definition in YAML.

The generated OpenAPI definition will be located under the folder *src-gen*.

## Notes
- Each schema definition  (#/definitions) of type `object` is represented as a class.
- The location of an operation (i.e., in which class it should be) is decided based on the schema this operation produces (response 2xx schema), the schema it consumes (parameter of type body), or the tags properties of the operation. When no class is a good fit for the operation, an artificial class is created to host the operation. The name of such class is inferred from the path of the operation.
- The name of an operation is taken from `operationId` of the operation definition. If such information is not provided the name is created by concatenating the method of the operation (e.g., get, post) plus the name of its class.
- The cardinalities of attributes and parameters are inferred from:
	- the `type` field (`array` for multivalued)
	- the `required` field in the OpenAPI definition (note that a required parameter or property of type `array` doesn't not mean that the lower bound should be 1. Empty arrays are still valid).
	- `minItems` and `maxItems` for `array` types.

N.B. This tool relies on [the OpenAPI metamodel](https://github.com/opendata-for-all/openapi-metamodel) and [the OpenAPI UML profile](https://github.com/opendata-for-all/openapi-profile).


[changelog]: ./CHANGELOG.md
[version-badge]: https://img.shields.io/badge/version-1.1.0-blue.svg
